Update rds module/docs to cover disaster recovery scenarios (#1868)
nasa/cumulus: docs/features/backup_and_restore.md

title: Cumulus Backup and Restore
hide_title: true
---

> <!-- markdownlint-disable MD029 -->

Author: It's just a comment line to disable a MD029 - the linter was getting angry about the broken up numbers and some of the indent/formatting.     

   https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint/blob/main/doc/Rules.md#md029

I think I may actually be able to sort that after a few updates to the examples.

> <!-- markdownlint-disable MD029 -->

Author: c9c68fe12

# Cumulus Backup and Restore

## Deployment Backup and Restore

Most of your Cumulus deployment can be recovered by redeploying via Terraform.
However, the Cumulus metadata including providers, collections, granules, rules,
and executions that are stored in [DynamoDB](./data_in_dynamodb), and
concurrently being written to the Core Postgres instance can only be
restored if backup was properly configured or enabled. If a deployment is lost,
logs and Step Function executions in the AWS console will be irrecoverable.

## Postgres Database

### Please note

* Cumulus supports a "bring your own" Postgres instance approach, however
  our reference implementation utilizes a serverless Aurora/RDS database - as
  such this reference provides AWS RDS Aurora Serverless backup options.

> * As of Core version 2.1+ Cumulus is transitioning from use of a DynamoDB backed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* As of Core version 3.0.0 Cumulus is transitioning from use of a DynamoDB backed
```

  primary database to a Postgres instance with a reference Aurora/RDS Postgres
  compatible module.     In this mode, the primary data records are still being
  written to DynamoDB (and replicated to Elastic Search), however replicated
  writes are being written to the required Postgres instance.  As such, the
  primary source of recovery should be considered to be a re-migration of data
  from the primary database.

### Backup and Restore

#### Re-migration

> In Cumulus v3.0.0+ the Postgres database is not the primary data store - as

Reviewer: Should we specify here that we mean (3.0.0+ but < 4.0.0)?

Author: Possibly.   I was going with the 'when we do release v4.0.0 we need a ticket to update the disaster recovery docs' approach, but if we feel including those future plans won't be confusing here, I could see it.

Author: How about 6812210a2

Reviewer: Maybe we should change it to version 5?

Recovery)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_PIT.html)
based on automated database backups and replay of transaction logs.

For further information on RDS backup procedures, see the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/CHAP_CommonTasks.BackupRestore.html)

##### Disaster Recovery

To recover a Cumulus Postgres database in a disaster or data-loss scenario, you should perform the following steps:

* If the Postgres database cluster exists/is still online, take it
  offline/remove access.
* If needed, recover the DynamoDB tables as noted in the
  [DyanmoDb](./backup_and_restore#dynamodb) section of this document.
* Redeploy a new database cluster from your backup, matching as closely as possible to the DynamoDB
  restore time.   See [AWS's
  PIT recovery
  instructions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_PIT.html)
  and [DB Snapshot recovery
  instructions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_RestoreFromSnapshot.html),
  or the examples below for more information.
* Configure your Cumulus deployment to utilize the new database cluster and re-deploy

> * Run DynamoDB/RDS reconciliation tools and resolve any discrepancies.

Author: I think the thought here is that if a user is in a 'don't remigrate' data recovery scenario they're explicitly choosing to revert a partly migrated RDS database.     

If you mean 'leave it out and add as part of the docs/recovery tool ticket'... that can work, I can add a AC to one of those tickets and remove.

> * Run DynamoDB/RDS reconciliation tools and resolve any discrepancies.

Reviewer 2: I think we intend to have reconciliation tools available with the feature branch. Is there any reason we might not?

> * Run DynamoDB/RDS reconciliation tools and resolve any discrepancies.

Author: So originally this was written under the assumption that we'd shortly have a situation where reads depend on Postgres (the NISAR feature) .   That's no longer the case. 

As  I'm coming around to the idea of a phase-2 reconciliation tool, disaster recovery would need to be done without reconciliation.... and really do we care?  

Meaning, if RDS is lost in a dual write situation, couldn't the answer just be "recover dynamo and don't bother"?    

If so, is there user value in worrying at all about recovery, aside from potential migration time loss?

> * Run DynamoDB/RDS reconciliation tools and resolve any discrepancies.

Reviewer: I think if we're in a dual write situation we don't care because you'd restore dynamo and remigrate.

##### cumulus-rds-tf examples

The following sections provide a walk through of a few recovery scenarios for the provided `cumulus-rds-tf`
serverless module.

***Point In Time Recovery***

If you need recovery that exceeds the 1-day granularity of AWS's snapshots, you
either must create and manually manage snapshots, or use Point In Time

> Recovery(PITR) if you still have the original cluster available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recovery (PITR) if you still have the original cluster available.
```

Unfortunately as terraform does not yet support RDS PITR (see:
[github terraform-provider issue #5286](https://github.com/terraform-providers/terraform-provider-aws/issues/5286)),
this requires a manual procedure.

If you are using the `cumulus-rds-tf` module to deploy an RDS Aurora Serverless
Postgres instance, the following procedure can be used to successfully spin up a duplicate
cluster from backup in recovery scenarios:

> 1. Halt all ingest and remove access to the database to prevent Core processes from

Reviewer: Should we say how to remove access?

Author: Good point. 

We have a couple of options there -- we can go the DB route where you do something like set max connections to 0 and kick all active connections for the *database* they're using, or we can invalidate the access secret which should kill any *new* connections.

Author: c9c68fe12 - I think, though, we have a larger problem in that halting an event-driven/async system is by nature fraught.    Killing database access may stop workflows, but it won't stop rules from being run, or dynamo/elastic search from being used for reads.

   writing to the old cluster.
2. Using the AWS CLI (see [AWS PITR
   documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/AuroraUserGuide/USER_PIT.html)
   for console instructions), run the following command, making *certain* to use
   the same subnet groups and vpc-security-group IDs from your Core deployment:

```bash
aws rds restore-db-cluster-to-point-in-time --source-db-cluster-identifier "<cluster_needing_restoration>" --restore-to-time "<time>" --vpc-security-group-ids "<security group 1>" "<security group 2>" --copy-tags-to-snapshot --db-cluster-identifier "<new cluster identifier>" --db-subnet-group-name "<db-subnet-group>"
```

You can get the configuration vales from the [RDS
console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/rds/) *or* by running the following
command and parsing the outputs:

```bash
aws rds describe-db-clusters
```

* cluster_needing_restoration -- the name of the database cluster you're
  restoring *from* (`DBClusterIdentifier` from the AWS RDS CLI output)
* time - The time in UTC format (e.g. 2015-03-07T23:45:00Z)

> * security_group_n - the security group IDs from your original deployment

Reviewer: These fields have dashes, underscores, and spaces. Is that just how it is?

Author: No, it's just sloppy.  I'll sort it to use underscores.

Author: f4d093f05

## Deployment Backup and Restore

Most of your Cumulus deployment can be recovered by redeploying via Terraform.
However, the Cumulus metadata including providers, collections, granules, rules,
and executions that are stored in [DynamoDB](./data_in_dynamodb), and
concurrently being written to the Core Postgres instance can only be
restored if backup was properly configured or enabled. If a deployment is lost,
logs and Step Function executions in the AWS console will be irrecoverable.

## Postgres Database

### Please note

* Cumulus supports a "bring your own" Postgres instance approach, however
  our reference implementation utilizes a serverless Aurora/RDS database - as
  such this reference provides AWS RDS Aurora Serverless backup options.

> * As of Cumulus version 3, data storage is transitioning from the use of a

Reviewer 2: This line is going to be out of date as we are currently looking at an unknown version for this release. Could we harvest it from somewhere in an automated way? Or is there some reference we can make to have docusaurus pick it up?

Reviewer 2: If not, either leave it out or put in a placeholder version? It occurs to me that it would be nice to have something to pick up `TODO` style comments before commit.

Author: I'm not aware of any sane way to do that, but I can do a quick timebox on figuring out a way to do it.

Author: It looks like the best way to accomplish this is an upgrade to docusarus v2.

Author: ccccd3e42 for now.    When this was originally written we were not on a feature branch.

  DynamoDB backed primary database to a Postgres instance with a reference Aurora/RDS Postgres
  compatible module.     In this mode, the primary data records are still being
  written to DynamoDB (and replicated to Elastic Search), however replicated
  writes are being written to the required Postgres instance.  As such, the
  primary source of recovery should be considered to be a re-migration of data
  from the primary database.

### Backup and Restore

#### Re-migration

> In Cumulus version 3 the Postgres database is not the primary data store - as

Reviewer 2: Same note about unknown version.

Author: ccccd3e42

due to migration time/other limitations.  In that case, utilizing an RDS recovery
approach in conjunction with the Dynamo to RDS reconciliation tooling
may be appropriate.

#### Backup and Restore with AWS RDS

##### Configuring Database Backups

For AWS RDS Aurora database deployments, AWS provides a host of database
backup/integrity options, including [PITR (Point In Time
Recovery)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_PIT.html)
based on automated database backups and replay of transaction logs.

For further information on RDS backup procedures, see the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/CHAP_CommonTasks.BackupRestore.html)

##### Disaster Recovery

To recover a Cumulus Postgres database in a disaster or data-loss scenario, you should perform the following steps:

* If the Postgres database cluster exists/is still online, halt workflow
  activity, then take the cluster offline/remove access.
* If needed, recover the DynamoDB tables as noted in the
  [DynamoDb](./backup_and_restore#dynamodb) section of this document.
* Redeploy a new database cluster from your backup, matching as closely as possible to the DynamoDB

>   restore time.   See [AWS's

Reviewer 2: ```
as closely as possible to the DynamoDB restore time
```
Is there a recommendation in terms of whether it is better to be behind or ahead of the DynamoDB time here?

Author: I don't know that i had that when this was being written.... 🤔 

Given our conversation yesterday, I would assume that we're going to want RDS to be *behind* the Dynamo time, as migration would pick up the difference.

Author: 3aed94f76

  PIT recovery
  instructions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_PIT.html)
  and [DB Snapshot recovery
  instructions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_RestoreFromSnapshot.html),
  or the examples below for more information.
* Configure your Cumulus deployment to utilize the new database cluster and re-deploy.
* Run DynamoDB/RDS reconciliation tools and resolve any discrepancies.

##### cumulus-rds-tf examples

The following sections provide a walk through of a few recovery scenarios for the provided `cumulus-rds-tf`
serverless module.

***Point In Time Recovery***

If you need recovery that exceeds the 1-day granularity of AWS's snapshots, you
either must create and manually manage snapshots, or use Point In Time
Recovery (PITR) if you still have the original cluster available.

Unfortunately as terraform does not yet support RDS PITR (see:
[github terraform-provider issue #5286](https://github.com/terraform-providers/terraform-provider-aws/issues/5286)),
this requires a manual procedure.

If you are using the `cumulus-rds-tf` module to deploy an RDS Aurora Serverless

> Postgres instance, the following procedure can be used to successfully spin up a duplicate

Reviewer 2: Use of `instance` here seems confusing, given the overlap with "EC2 instance", which are not relevant to a Serverless deployment.

Author: 794f2f759

cluster from backup in recovery scenarios where the database cluster is still viable:

> #### **1. Halt all ingest/remove access to the database to prevent Core processes from writing to the old cluster.**

Reviewer 2: I don't really like the use of the slash here because it isn't clear whether it's an AND or an OR on halting ingest and/or removing access.

Author: 7ae916cf8

##### Halt Ingest

Deactivate all Cumulus Rules, halt all clients that access the archive API and
stop any other database accessor processes.   Ensure all active executions have
completed before proceeding.

##### Remove Database Cluster Access

> Depending on your database cluster/setup, there are several ways to limit access to the

Reviewer 2: Cluster and setup are two very different things, so the intended context here is unclear to me.

Author: How about f5efd2851

database.   One example:

Log in as the administrative user to your database cluster and run:

```sql
alter database my_database connection limit 0;
select pg_terminate_backend(pg_stat_activity.pid) from pg_stat_activity where pg_stat_activity.datname = 'database';
```

This should block new connections to the Core database from the database user

> and cause database writes to fail.

Reviewer 2: Does this mesh with our feature design, that we are recommending an approach that causes writes to fail?

Author: Perhaps this is worth a further arch meeting discussion - the details here heavily depend on the recovery scenario.    

> Does this mesh with our feature design

🤔  perhaps not.   That's mostly as we don't have yet have a a robust write failure reconciliation handling solution. 

That said, in a recovery scenario where you want to use PITR, it creates a *new* cluster, then you have to switch over to the new database, which is at a set point in time.     If you cause records to fail write, you rely on whatever failure reconciliation you have in the default system.  If you allow them to write, you have to deal with data reconciliation between the PITR copy and the final live system. 

I think this warrants further discussion.

Reviewer 2: Took a TODO note for this topic.

Take care that you aren't using the admin user (e.g. postgres) with a default

> database or you may inadvertently limit connections by your administrative

Reviewer 2: Is it the admin user or the default database that is the issue here? What 'administrative tasks'? Postgres-internal tasks?

Author: If you reduce connection counts *and* kill existing connections to your admin user inadvertently you could make it impossible to connect as the admin user, or access the database <things> are using to store config/values/?

Author: Probably this could be vaugeified with a warning that says "make sure you're using the correct db user/database" ?

Author: Really though, you don't want to be running with a situation where you have *one* database defined (e.g. postgres) and you limit your access to it via your administrative user.

tasks.

> #### **2. Using the AWS CLI (see [AWS PITR documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/AuroraUserGuide/USER_PIT.html) for console instructions), run the following command, making *certain* to use the same subnet groups and vpc-security-group IDs from your Core deployment:**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### **2. Using the AWS CLI (see [AWS PITR documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/AuroraUserGuide/USER_PIT.html) for console instructions), making *certain* to use the same subnet groups and vpc-security-group IDs from your Core deployment, run the following command:**
```

  ```

  You can get the configuration vales from the [RDS
  console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/rds/) *or* by running the following
  command and parsing the outputs:

  ```bash
  aws rds describe-db-clusters
  ```

* cluster-needing-restoration -- the name of the database cluster you're
  restoring *from* (`DBClusterIdentifier` from the AWS RDS CLI output)
* time - The time in UTC format (e.g. 2015-03-07T23:45:00Z)
* security-group-# - the security group IDs from your original deployment
* new-cluster-identifier - The cluster name for the backup replica.   This
  *must* be different than the original
* db-subnet-group - The db subnet group created for the original cluster
  (`DBSubnetGroup` from the AWS RDS CLI output)

  Once this command is run, you should see the cluster appear in the RDS cluster
  list with a `Creating` status.  Verify the creating cluster has a

>   reasonable configuration.   Once the cluster is online, manually validate

Reviewer 2: What does 'reasonable' mean in this context?

Author: "Similar to what you had before"?  

Some of this is intentionally vague, as we're writing docs for an architecture we didn't ... architect?   

How about: 7500b607e

Reviewer 2: I think that's much better 👍

  that it has the tables/data you expect, then proceed.

#### 3. Import cluster into terraform state

Run the following commands to bring the new cluster into the
terraform state file, where {module_name} is the title you've assigned to the module:

* Remove the old cluster from your terraform state:

```bash

> terraform state {module_name}.aws_rds_cluster.cumulus

Reviewer 2: What would be the `module_name` for our example deployment? I'm finding it hard to confirm that this terraform resource path is correct.

Author: I believe that should be  `rds_cluster` as seen in https://github.com/nasa/cumulus/blob/master/example/rds-cluster-tf/main.tf

```

* Add the restored cluster to your terraform state:

```bash
terraform import {module_name}.aws_rds_cluster.cumulus <new cluster identifier>
```

#### 4. Update module `terraform.tfvars` such that the cluster_identifier variable matches the *new* database cluster

> #### 5. Run a terraform plan.   ***Be very careful*** to ensure that the `module.rds_cluster.aws_rds_cluster.cumulus` resource is not being recreated as this will wipe the postgres database.    You should expect to see the cluster be modified, not replaced, and the rds_login secret *version* will be replaced, as the host name will change

Reviewer 2: Feels like screenshots would be nice to illustrate what to look for.

Author: Hmm, ok, I can see about doing that.

Author: 15696eedc

   Once everything looks acceptable, run:

```bash
terraform apply
```

#### 6. Redeploy Cumulus - you shouldn't need to reconfigure Core, as the secret ARN and the security group should not change, however double-check the configured values are as expected

> &nbsp;\

Reviewer 2: ..?

Author: Manual spacing - the page looked **terrible** without it.

***Snapshot Recovery***

A RDS cluster can be recreated from a manually created snapshot
or one of your automated backups.   These backups do not require a live cluster,

> and work in case of accidental deletion or full cluster/backup failure. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and can be used for recovery in case of accidental deletion or full cluster/backup failure. The
```
